---
layout: post
title: Layman's Tea Breakdown
date: 2010-11-07 
category: main
tags:
 - tea
 - overview
---

<p>Been doing some research on tea lately.  This is a super-basic breakdown to help someone from being totally overwhelmed with a tea menu.  Here's a quick list of the different types, caffeine content, etc.  There are 2 real types of Tea; those from the Camellia Sinensis plant and "Herbal."  Camellia Sinensis is the real tea-tree type, while herbal is the catch all for everything we've come to associate with tea, but really is just a bunch of herbs to be drunk together.  Remind me to throw together a post on folk taxonomies in the future to go further into this catch-all business.<br/><br/><em>Quick brewing note:  Excessively hot water causes release of tannin, i.e. you'll be drinking bitter tea.  Water should not be boiling when added, but just under.  Steeping time should be around 3o seconds to 3 minutes.</em><br/><h3>Camellia Sinensis</h3><br/><h4>Green Tea</h4><br/>Green tea is as basic as you can get, widespread usage originated from China but has since spread to being grown all throughout Asia and throughout the world.  Green tea is straight off the plant, <strong>unoxidized </strong>and dried with minimal processing.<br/><ul><br/>	<li>Caffeine: 20mg (range :15-30)</li><br/></ul><br/><h4>White Tea</h4><br/>White tea is a somewhat younger version of green tea.  White tea is picked before the buds have fully flowered (i.e. have little white hairs still on them, hence the name).  The <strong>least caffeinated</strong> of any natural tea, due to its young age.  Also <strong>unoxidized with minimal processing.</strong><br/><ul><br/>	<li>Caffeine: 15mg (range: 6-25)</li><br/></ul><br/><h4>Black Tea</h4><br/>Black tea is <strong>fully oxidized, giving it a stronger flavor and more caffeine</strong>.  The process grants black tea a longer shelf-life, so it could originally be transported to Europe and survive the trip from Asia with more flavor and plenty of caffeine.  Still made with Camellia Sinensis but occasionally leaves from the Assamese variety.<br/><ul><br/>	<li><br/><h4>Caffeine: 40mg (range: 40-60)</h4><br/></li><br/></ul><br/><h4>Oolong Tea</h4><br/>Oolong tea is traditionally a Chinese tea, partially oxidized and therefore halfway between a green and a black.  <strong>Oxidation is between 10 to 70%</strong>.  This is the most popular tea served in Chinese restaurants.<br/><h3>Herbal</h3><br/>There are way, way too many varieties to list here since this is basically a made-up category but I'll cover just two of the most popular.<br/><h4>Yerba Mate</h4><br/>Mate is made from the Ilex Paraguarensis plant.  It is harvested heavily throughout South America and extremely popular throughout Argentina and Brazil.  Usually drunk out of a gourd, some like to add some lemon to it, where it earned the nickname "terere" [TEH-REH-RAY, trilling each "R"].  Mate has been believed to have a chemical called Mateine in it, as an alternative to caffeine but recent research and really shown the two to be more or less synonymous.<br/><h4>Rooibos Tea</h4><br/>Rooibos Tea (aka "Red Tea") is made from Aspalathus Linearis, a red bush plant popular in South Africa.  The plant has a <strong>low tannin</strong> concentration and <strong>no caffeine</strong>, making it a nice alternative to teas of the Camellia family.</p>
