---
layout: post
title: Highlights from Pandora Town Hall
date: 2010-10-22
category: notes
tags:
 - notes
 - pandora
 - lecture
description: Highlights from Tim, founder, talking about his company Pandora.com
---

I attended the "Pandora Town Hall" meeting tonight where Tim (founder of Pandora.com) spoke at Weiden+Kennedy advertising firm.  The talk was an illuminating look into the history of the company, its founding and inevitable financial issues, and most interestingly the Music Genome Project powering the site.  The meet-ups are apparently something Tim has been doing since the founding of the site in 2005 where he travels around to get real input from the genuine site users.<br/><br/>The idea of Pandora came about sometime around January of 2000 and finally solidified into the free service Pandora.com in November of 2005.  Before that the site was a subscription service with the first 10 hours free then a $3 a month credit card fee.<br/><br/>Apparently the site designer used to work at a children's museum, hence the simplicity of design.<br/><br/>As Tim says "thumbing is kind of an art."  and users LOVE to thumb.  Some 2 billion thumbs were processed in 2010 alone.<br/><br/><strong>How about that Music Genome Project? </strong><br/><br/>400 genes make up the genome for song sequencing by Pandora's analysts.  Pandora employs some 25 musicians who simply sit and listen to music all day scoring songs on headphones.  Every single song (about 80,000 within the system now) is done manually, since computers cannot do the quality job a true human can.  A 4-minute pop song takes about 15 minutes to map, and a symphony can take an hour and a half.  The team seems to map out about 10,000 songs a month this way.<br/><br/>Tempo is the most defining feature of the genome map.<br/><br/>Analysts must go through 100 hours of training before they can map pop/rock songs.  After that, there is another test and tier for jazz mapping, and then even a third for the elusive classical music mappers.<br/><br/>Only 10% of songs need to be mapped twice.  If need be, with additional mapping over 90% are within a couple points of each other.<br/><br/><strong>How are which songs to be added chosen?</strong> Every missed search is tracked data to give the analysts heads-up on what music to add next.<br/><br/><strong>Metadata?</strong> The only metadata used in mapping is year song was released.  The Pandora team is actually pretty damn religious about user privacy and stores next to nothing on user-identifiable data.<br/><br/><strong>What about artist royalties?</strong><br/><br/>Artists are paid 2 cents an hour (which seriously adds up given the amount of music constantly streaming (that's some 65 million users in the U.S. alone).  Pandora pulled in $500 million revenue last year with 60% paid to artists as performance and publishing fees.<br/><br/><strong>Tips:</strong><br/><br/>If you like a certain band with a long, varying career and only really like one genre of their stuff, Tim recommended launching the station by a specific song, rather than the artist.  Due to the intricacies of the genome, it will give you a more accurate reading by the style of the song over the artist.<br/><br/>Bookmarking and Skipping are neutral features on Pandora that do not affect likes/dislikes.<br/><br/>Songs are played in 3 or 4 song sets, if you're curious about stylization patterns.
