---
layout: post
title: Journal Entry 26feb2012
date: 2012-02-26
category: journal
tags:
 - journal
 - writing
description: a journal entry for February 26th, 2012
---

I've been crazy self-reflective lately.  Probably not any more so than normal but my self-reflectiveness has started to interact more with my social life at least.  I was out with two friends tonight, two old friends which may or may not be important, and in talking about my mood recently I was astounded by how often my own perspectives on reality deviated from them.  And these are my friends, not strangers or people who share drastically different viewpoints than my own.  We joked about me having asperger's in my overly-literal interpretation of what exactly eye-contact means and yet again how much I overthink the semantics of such a term.  In this case it was me talking about how little I get out of directly staring into someone's eyes yet how I've been complimented multiple times on my eye contact.  They talked about how "well yeah" it doesn't exactly mean staring into someone's eyes but the general region of the eyeline.  I go out of my way to make my actions volitional, and try and make ALL my actions volitional.  This is how I view critical thinking, in being self reflective, and while that isn't all it is I feel it is important.

I just don't get it.  My friends joked about how I might have Asperger's or something and I have been thinking about that ever since. Perhaps I do, who knows.  But I don't really care what label goes on what, it doesn't matter if whatever cognitive state I'm in is already qualified and documented, but if for all intents and purposes this fits me, how should that effect my behavior?  In other words, if I realize that I am a total psychopath, do I choose to live my life differently than I do right now?  I am not talking about what I would rationalize, but how I should legitimately behave, assuming I have the capability to not be ruled by my own subjectivity.

The other issue is how interesting it would be for me if one of them were to read this post, which is possible, but I wouldn't say likely.  Lately I have been planning this experiment that I am calling "Project Digital" who I have only really told one other person about.  It is the idea of living an ENTIRELY public life for one month (or however long I eventually decide to do it).  I was planning on writing these daily overly-self-reflective reflections, posting my sleep data every single day, posting a detailed food journal, posting a half-hour-by-half-hour log of my activities, posting my receipts and all my purchases, and anything else I can think of.  Other random ideas included my fluctuating weight, work out routines on my gym days, total inches (link?), and other things.  There isn't really any goal in doing this but I thought it would be nice for-- if nothing else-- having an eerily accurate model of myself online.  Basically an external DNA or a social-impact model.

Similarly, as I relaunched this site I have been thinking about these two things, big data and public-self.  In big data terms this isn't anything new; I want to catalogue every aspect of my life to quantify and better understand it.  It isn't really about me since I would love for everyone to do this, but I have more control over myself than I do others.  On a similar tangent project I've been considering, I would like to start a gym with computers for patrons to easily record their workouts and weight so I can get a voluntary longitudinal body-type and workout study done.  Kinda like OKCupid's OKTrends but with fitness.

For the other thing I've been thinking about, public-self, I have been thinking about how these large-scale experiments will effect my life and others around me.  One of my current projects is a study of the effects of LSD on color-blindness.  I dropped acid a while back with a colorblind friend and they were able to recognize colors in a way that they had not previously experienced.  I researched this briefly and it turns out there is some evidence for LSD effecting color-perception in the colorblind.  I would love to set up an experiment like htis and I am currently hoping to gather at least 3 colorblind participants and 2 or 3 controls to test this out.  There are all kinds of logistic problems involved but this isn't the place for that.

My issue is on posting this data.  This is something I ran into before in a popular ancedote I like to tell where once I asked a professor about such research outside of academia.  My question was if I went to Africa by myself, documented an endangered language, used a rock-solid methodology, stellar recording methods, and wrote it up in a clear and excellent way is there any chance taht I would e able to get that published (i.e. without a university backing me).  Like I assumed, he said probably not.  So, I am by-passing all that bullshit. Knowledge is knowledge and while there are perfectly valid reasons why the system that is in place is in place, we still tend to recognize such research (like the horribly unethical scientific endeavors of the Nazis) as part of our collective knowledge base.  We know we will never have an opportunity to sew identical twins together again and that is perfectly fine, but in all seriousness, now we know that it doesn't work.  This of course follows the pressumptions that science cannot inform ethical judgement (see Sam Harris' "moral landscape" who begs to differ).  Either way, I will be able to publicly post and get ou the knowledge to some people that perhaps LSD is the right direction for the colorblind to experience colors in the profound way that others do.

In a similar but entirely different way more inline with my private life, I have been smoking on a porch as I have been writing this.  The side-effect of such a bluntly honest approach to public-self or my own Project Digital would be spreading knowledge about such things as this.  I do not know if I want others to know that I smoke occasionally.  Or more accurately, I do not know if I care.  In this case of the LSD Colorblindness testing, I wonder if all the rumors I know of bad internet shit biting me when I try and apply for a job in the future is true.  If so, will having a large webpage on my personal site (that's easy to connect to my real identity) talking about illegal drugs matter?  Will it matter for any future endeavors I want to pursue?  The easy answer is that I may not want any job or to deal with anyone who actually would be bothered, yet that is not so simple.  The current world is still annoyingly bitter about such matters and I think cooperation and adaptation is more important than brutal ideology.


